          metals
Article
Characterization of the Microstructure, Local
Macro-Texture and Residual Stress Field of
Commercially Pure Titanium Grade 2 Prepared
by CONFORM ECAP
Gergely Németh 1,2, *, Klaudia Horváth 1,2 , Charles Hervoches 1 , Petr Cejpek 3 , Jan Palán 4 ,
Michal Duchek 4 and Kristián Máthis 1,2
 1   Department of Neutron Physics, Nuclear Physics Institute of the CAS, Husinec—Řež 130, 250 68 Řež,
     Czech Republic; horvathk@karlov.mff.cuni.cz (K.H.); hervoches@ujf.cas.cz (C.H.);
     mathis@met.mff.cuni.cz (K.M.)
 2   Department of Physics of Materials, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Ke Karlovu 5,
     121 16 Prague 2, Czech Republic
 3   Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Ke
     Karlovu 5, 121 16 Prague 2, Czech Republic; petr.cejpek@centrum.cz
 4   Metallurgical Technologies Department, COMTES FHT a.s., Průmyslová 995, 334 41 Dobřany,
     Czech Republic; jan.palan@comtesfht.cz (J.P.); michal.duchek@comtesfht.cz (M.D.)
 *   Correspondence: gergely1227@gmail.com; Tel.: +420-9-5155-1623
                                                                                                     
 Received: 4 November 2018; Accepted: 26 November 2018; Published: 29 November 2018                  


 Abstract: The paper investigated the residual strain and stress distribution, microstructure,
 and macro-texture along the transverse direction of commercially pure titanium grade 2 samples
 prepared by the CONFORM ECAP technique. This method belongs to the severe plastic deformation
 methods; hence, it could be assumed that residual stress fields would be present in the work-pieces.
 Residual stresses cannot be directly measured; thus, neutron diffraction measurements, Electron
 back-scatter diffraction (EBSD) investigations, and local X-ray macro-texture measurements were
 performed in different regions of the sample to determine the data for the residual stress calculation.
 The calculation was based on the modified Kröner model. Neutron diffraction strain scans and
 residual stress calculations revealed that symmetrical residual strain and stress gradients with
 compression character were present in the axial and hoop direction after one and two passes.
 Asymmetric distribution of the residual strains and stresses remained after the third pass of the
 CONFORM ECAP. EBSD investigations showed that after the first pass, significant grain refinement
 occurred; however, further passes did not cause any dramatic grain refinement. X-ray texture
 measurements revealed that local macro-texture was dependent on the number of passes of the
 CONFORM ECAP and on the investigated area in the samples.

 Keywords: titanium; CONFORM; ECAP; residual; strain; stress; EBSD; texture




1. Introduction
     Titanium and its alloys have a wide range of applications due to possessing high strength,
low density, excellent corrosion resistivity, and nontoxicity [1]. For many years, the materials have
been playing an important role in medicine, where a large number of implants are titanium-based.
In biomedical application, the desired mechanical properties are usually achieved through alloying.
However, some of the alloying elements are believed to be toxic to the human body, which limits the
elements usage as biocompatible materials. Thus, the scientific community is constantly seeking


Metals 2018, 8, 1000; doi:10.3390/met8121000                                     www.mdpi.com/journal/metals
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                2 of 20



for new approaches, which can lead to the enhancement of the mechanical properties without
harmful additives.
      One of the possible approaches is the processing of the material using severe plastic deformation
(SPD). It has been shown that SPD processes can significantly improve the mechanical properties of
materials through grain refinement and the introduction of many lattice defects [2]. The equal-channel
angular pressing (ECAP) method, where the billet is pressed through two intersecting channels,
belongs to the most popular method. The main advantage of this method is that the processed sample
retains the initial cross-section in contrast to other industrial processing methods, for example, rolling
or extrusion. In the last two decades, many studies have appeared on the topic of ECAP processed
titanium alloys. All investigations agreed that the ECAP method led to an ultra-fine grained (UFG)
microstructure and enhanced strength [3–8].
      Despite the many benefits of the ECAP method, it cannot be used on an industrial scale because
of the non-continuous manner of the process. This problem was overcome by the introduction of the
CONFORM ECAP (C-ECAP) method [9], where the work-piece was driven forward in a curved die by
the friction forces until it reached the abutment and was forced to turn an angle by shear as in a regular
ECAP process. A comparative study by Medvedev et al. between conventional the ECAP and C-ECAP
methods reported that after the application of C-ECAP, commercially pure (CP) titanium (Ti) grade
4 exhibited finer grains and a higher yield and ultimate tensile strength than after the application of
the conventional ECAP [10]. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the same study reported heavily
distorted grains and structure after the C-ECAP, whilst there were almost defect-free grains after the
conventional ECAP. This fact gives rise to the supposition that the C-ECAP treatment increases the
probability of the existence of a higher residual stress field and an inhomogeneous strain distribution
in the processed material [11,12].
      The residual stresses in many cases can negatively influence the quality and behavior of engineering
components. In some extreme situations, the existence of the stresses may lead to significant distortion
or deformation of the parts or in the worst cases, even to fracture. Thus, understanding the stresses
origin may allow the lengthening of the components service life. The residual stresses can be successfully
studied using diffraction-based methods [13,14]. Neutron and hard X-ray diffraction measurements are
preferentially used for this purpose, since they allow the studying of bulk samples, due to the large
penetration depth of neutrons and the high-energy X-ray photons in the majority of the materials [14,15].
However, only a few studies of this kind were performed on materials processed by the ECAP or C-ECAP
methods [16], and limited data are available for the ECAP processed Ti.
      The objective of the present paper was the investigation of the residual strain using neutron
diffraction in CP Ti grade 2 samples processed by the C-ECAP method. Electron back-scatter diffraction
(EBSD) studies and local X-ray texture measurements were also performed to elucidate the microscopic
background responsible for the stress field. The influence of the number of C-ECAP passes on the
residual strain field distribution was also discussed in detail.

2. Materials and Methods
     CP Ti grade 2 was studied in this work. The chemical composition of the samples can be found in
Table 1.

                         Table 1. Chemical composition of the processed material, wt.%.

                   Element        Fe         O          C          H          N            Ti
                   Content      0.046       0.12       0.023     0.0026     0.0076        Rest


     Work-pieces in the form of 2 m long cylindrical rods with a diameter of 10 mm were subjected
to the C-ECAP process as described in reference [9] using COMTES FHT a.s. company’s specially
designed machine, as in reference [17]. Specimens passed 1×, 2×, and 3× through the C-ECAP
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                                       3 of 20


Metals 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                          3 of 20
machine on a route denoted as “A” during the multiple C-ECAP processes described in reference [18].
Then,        long samples were cut from the rods after the mechanical treatments.
      80 mmDiffraction
2.1. Neutron
      Neutron
2.1. Neutron       diffraction (ND) measurements were carried out on the samples after the C-ECAP
               Diffraction
 treatment at the Nuclear Research Institute, Řež, Czech Republic, on the HK4 beamline. The beamline
 HK4Neutron
       is equippeddiffraction
                       with a strain        measurements
                                     (ND) scanner      SPN-100were     carried outsupported
                                                                 diffractometer                      by a 2Dafter
                                                                                         on the samples             the C-ECAP
                                                                                                               position  sensitive
treatment   at the  Nuclear         Research   Institute,  Řež, Czech   Republic,     on
 detector (PSD) and a Si (111) monochromator. The complete description of the instrument    the HK4    beamline.   The  beamline
                                                                                                                           can be
HK4   is equipped      with
 found in References [19,20]. a     strain scanner    SPN-100    diffractometer       supported     by  a  2D position  sensitive
      The(PSD)
detector                  a Si (111)wavelength
                    and neutron
            diffracted                     monochromator.
                                                        was 2.13 TheÅ complete
                                                                       and square    description
                                                                                        shaped slits     the instrument
                                                                                                     of with   3 mm side can   be
                                                                                                                           length
found   in References
 were used.    The center  [19,20].
                              of the 2D PSD was set to a fixed value 2θD = 55° during the experiments. This
      The  diffracted    neutron
 2θD angle allowed the observation     wavelength     was 2.13 Å(101
                                                 of reflections     and  square
                                                                             and shaped
                                                                      ̅ 1)         (0002),slits
                                                                                              andwith     3 mm side
                                                                                                   the nominal       length
                                                                                                                  gauge      were
                                                                                                                          volume
used.   The  center   of  the  2D      PSD  was    set to a fixed  value    2θ   =   55 ◦ during the experiments. This 2θ
 (NGV) was ~32.96 mm3.                                                       D                                                  D
       allowed were
angleSamples      the observation         of  reflections   1011    and   ( 0002 ) , and  the  nominal
                          placed on the xyz stage, which allowed both the motion in three perpendicular    gauge  volume   (NGV)
was  ∼32.96i.e.,
               mmx, 3.
 directions,           y, and z, as well as the rotation by an arbitrary angle.
      Samples were
      Samples      wereplaced
                            scanned    on the  xyzND,
                                           using     stage,  whichthe
                                                          where      allowed
                                                                         sampled         the motion
                                                                                 bothgauge       volume in three
                                                                                                            was perpendicular
                                                                                                                  moved in the
directions,  i.e., x, y, and    z,    as well  as the  rotation  by  an  arbitrary    angle.
 coordinate system of the sample. The scanning was performed along a straight line by 1 mm shifts,
 whichSamples      werethe
         intersected       scanned
                              center of   using    ND, where
                                             the circular          the sampled
                                                            cross-section.    This linegauge    volume
                                                                                            lay in          was moved
                                                                                                   the transverse          in the
                                                                                                                      direction  in
coordinate    system     of  the     sample.    The  scanning    was   performed       along
 the conventional ECAP notation. Three scans were performed along the same line on each sample:a straight   line by  1 mm   shifts,
which intersected the center of the circular cross-section. This line lay in the transverse direction in the
 (1) diffraction
conventional    ECAP vector    𝑞
                               ⃗⃗⃗⃗𝑅 wasThree
                          notation.         parallel
                                                  scanswith
                                                         weretheperformed      along of
                                                                 radial direction       thethe sample;
                                                                                             same   line on each sample:
 (2) diffraction vector →      𝑞
                               ⃗⃗⃗⃗𝐻 was parallel with the hoop direction;
(1)                  vector q𝑞
      diffraction vector
 (3) diffraction                       wasparallel
                               ⃗⃗⃗⃗R𝐴 was              withthe
                                            parallelwith     theradial  direction of the sample;
                                                                 axial direction.
                              →
(2)   diffraction
      The          of theqscanning
           schemevector    H was parallel withinthe
                                   is drawn         hoop1.direction;
                                                 Figure
                         →
(3)   diffraction vector q A was parallel with the axial direction.

      The scheme of the scanning is drawn in Figure 1.




                                             Figure 1. Scheme of the ND scans.
                                             Figure 1. Scheme of the ND scans.

     The differential form of Bragg’s Equation (1) was used for calculation of the lattice strain 𝜀 ℎ𝑘𝑙 of
the particular crystallographic plains as follows.
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                4 of 20



     The differential form of Bragg’s Equation (1) was used for calculation of the lattice strain εhkl of
the particular crystallographic plains as follows.

                                           dhkl − d0hkl
                                                                h        i             
                                 hkl                                   B0       B      B0
                             ε         =                      = − cot θhkl     θhkl − θhkl             (1)
                                              d0hkl

                B0 are the interplanar distance of the hkl planes of the stress-free reference and the
     d0hkl and θhkl
corresponding Bragg angle. Furthermore, dhkl and θhkl B are the interplanar distance of the hkl planes

under load and the corresponding Bragg angle.
     The ND scanning started at a distance of –3 mm and ended at distance of +3 mm from the center of
the samples. Omission of the measurement points at the edges of the specimen (positions ±4 mm) was
given by the fact that at these points the NGV was not completely filled with material, which resulted
                B shifts, and consequently in spurious strains [21].
in anomalous θhkl

2.2. EBSD
     Specimens for the microstructural analysis with the EBSD technique were cut from the samples
used at the ND measurements. Samples were prepared by standard metallographic grinding on SiC
papers (from 320 to 1200 grit), followed by three-step vibratory polishing for 24 h (Alumina 0.3 µm,
Alumina 0.05 µm, and Colloidal Silica 0.04 µm—each for eight hours). Finally, the specimen surfaces
were ion-beam polished on a Leica EM RES102 system (Leica Mikrosysteme, Wetzlar, Germany).
The investigated surfaces were perpendicular to the axial direction.
     Microstructure analysis based on the EBSD technique was performed using a scanning electron
microscope FEI Quanta 200 FX (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Brno, Czech Republic). Working distance
was 13 mm with accelerating voltage 15 kV. The scan was conducted with a 0.1 µm step size.
     The scanned areas (left and right periphery, and the central part) were chosen with the aim to
characterize the microstructure in the ND irradiated sample volume.

2.3. X-ray Texture
     The X-ray PANalytical XPert MRD (PANanalytical, Almelo, The Netherlands) diffractometer
using CuKα radiation with polycapillary optics in the primary beam was employed for acquiring
                          
the (0002), 1010 , and 1011 pole figures. The orientation distribution functions (ODF) and the full
pole figures were determined using MTEX 4.4 Free and open source software toolbox for MatLab
(MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) [22].

2.4. Calculation of the Residual Stresses
     The calculation of the residual stresses in the three perpendicular directions (axial, hoop,
and radial) was based on the results acquired by the EBSD, X-ray texture, and ND measurements.
The calculation was done using the software IsoDEC version from 9/21/2016 (NIST Center for Neutron
Research, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) as in reference [23], where the computation was based on the
model proposed by Kröner [24] and modified by Bollenrath [25] and Behnken [26]. Owing to the
assumption of grain-interactions, the model allowed for the use of specific grain shapes to calculate
the right diffraction elastic constants. Moreover, the crystallographic preferred orientation (texture) of
the sample given by the orientation distribution function (ODF) was also included in the model.

3. Results and Discussion

3.1. Neutron Diffraction and Residual Strain
                                                                        B angles were determined from
      The residual strains were calculated using Equation (1), where θhkl
the neutron diffraction measurements. The average of the measured θhkl  B angles between points −3 and
                                                                                         B0 ), because the
3 in the axial direction of the initial sample were taken as the stress-free reference (θhkl
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                                        5 of 20



angle variation through the sample was small in contrast to the hoop and radial directions. The residual
strains in the radial, hoop, and axial directions are shown for each sample in Figure 2a–c. The sample
       2018,
Metalsthe
after             FOR PEER REVIEW
             8, x C-ECAP
          first                                                                                      of 20
                           pass was denoted as C1, then after the second pass as C2, and after the 5third
pass as C3.




      Figure 2. Residual strain distribution in the axial (a), hoop (b), and radial (c) direction of the samples
      Figure
      after        Residual
            the2.first,      strain
                        second, anddistribution
                                    third C-ECAPin the axial (a), hoop (b), and radial (c) direction of the samples
                                                   pass.
      after the first, second, and third C-ECAP pass.
3.1.1. Axial Direction
 3.1.1. Axial Direction
       It was obvious that in the axial direction, after the first pass, the peripheral regions were almost
        It waswhilst
strain-free      obvious in that             of thedirection,
                                   in the axial
                              the center                          large the
                                                      sample, after          firstwith
                                                                         strain    pass,compression
                                                                                          the peripheral     regionswas
                                                                                                          character   werepresent.
                                                                                                                             almost
 strain-free
This   behavior  whilst   in the
                    resulted          large of
                                in acenter       the gradient,
                                              strain               wherestrain
                                                       sample, large       the strain   compression
                                                                                  with changed     from character
                                                                                                          ∼−17 µε to was∼−present.
                                                                                                                             600 µε
 Thisthe
(on     behavior
           left sideresulted
                       of Figurein2a-C1) largeandstrain
                                                     from gradient,
                                                            ∼−600 µε   where
                                                                          to ∼−the110
                                                                                    strain
                                                                                       µε (onchanged    from
                                                                                                the right   side~−17          ~−600
                                                                                                                      με to2a-C1).
                                                                                                                 of Figure
 με (on the leftfrom
Furthermore,          sidea of  Figure 2a-C1)
                             comparison       of thisand   from
                                                       result  with~−600
                                                                     otherμε   to ~−110and
                                                                            directions      με numbers
                                                                                                (on the right   side (Figure
                                                                                                                     of Figure
                                                                                                           of passes             2a-
                                                                                                                               2a–c)
 C1).   Furthermore,        from    a   comparison       of  this
it was obvious that such a large gradient was unique for this case.result  with    other  directions    and   numbers     of passes
 (Figure
       After   the it
            2a–c)      was obvious
                    second                that such
                               pass (Figure            a large
                                                 2a-C2),         gradient wasstrain
                                                            the compression        unique    for this in
                                                                                                      case.
                                                                                         increased       the periphery, whereas
in theAfter
          center     second
                thepart  it hadpass    (Figure
                                  slightly        2a-C2), the
                                               decreased.        compression strain
                                                               Consequently,             increased
                                                                                  the strain          in the
                                                                                               gradient    wasperiphery,   whereas
                                                                                                                less pronounced.
    the center
 in general,
In              thepart
                     shapeit had
                              of theslightly    distributionConsequently,
                                       strain decreased.                          the strain
                                                                through the samples            gradient
                                                                                           in the          was less after
                                                                                                                     pronounced.
                                                                                                   axial direction,        the first
 In general,
and                     was aof“V”
                 the shape
      second pass,                        strain distribution through the samples in the axial direction, after the
                                    theform.
       and second
 first After   the thirdpass,   was
                             pass              form. the compression strain reached a lower value in the center
                                       a “V” 2a-C3),
                                    (Figure
of theAfter
          samplethe third
                     and atpass the(Figure
                                      same time       the the
                                                2a-C3),         compression
                                                            strain  had increasedstraininreached    a lower value
                                                                                            the periphery.           in the of
                                                                                                                The shape     center
                                                                                                                                the
 of the sample
overall             and at the same
           strain distribution        lost time
                                            the “V”the form,    had itincreased
                                                        strainand                             wave-likeThe
                                                                                     the periphery.
                                                                        took on ainrather                     shape
                                                                                                          shape      of the lowest
                                                                                                                  with       overall
 strain distribution
compression        strain in    thethe
                             lost         “V” ofform,
                                     center               and it took
                                                   the sample.            on a rather
                                                                    The reason     was thatwave-like
                                                                                               during theshape   with
                                                                                                             third      the lowest
                                                                                                                   C-ECAP      pass,
 compression strain in the center of the sample. The reason was that during the third C-ECAP pass,
 the alignment of the work-piece, as a consequence of the previous severe deformation, was not
 precise. Consequently, the stress distribution during the processing was uneven, which caused the
 asymmetric residual strains with wave-like form in the axial direction.
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                 6 of 20



the alignment of the work-piece, as a consequence of the previous severe deformation, was not precise.
Consequently, the stress distribution during the processing was uneven, which caused the asymmetric
residual strains with wave-like form in the axial direction.
     In summary, the first pass introduced a large strain gradient in the axial direction toward the
center of the sample. The increasing number of passes (2x-3x passes) increased the compression strain
in the peripheral regions, whilst decreasing the compression strain in the center part.

3.1.2. Hoop Direction
     In the hoop direction, all of the values showed a compression strain character (Figure 2b). It was
obvious that after the first and second pass, the strain distribution followed the same shape through
the sample (Figure 2b-C1, C2). The difference was in the higher values of the compression strain after
the second pass. After the third pass (Figure 2b-C3), the C-ECAP process resulted in a decrement
of the compression strain (increasing the interplanar distance) on the left side of the sample, whilst
on the right side of the sample, the interplanar distance decreased (compression character was more
pronounced) with respect to the previous pass.

3.1.3. Radial Direction
     The residual strain distributions through the samples in the radial direction after the first and
second pass showed a very homogenous nature with the compression character (Figure 2c-C1, C2).
After the first pass, the values were distributed around −200 µε. Only at the right peripheral region of
the sample was the strain closer to the stress-free reference. After the second pass, the residual strain
values were distributed around −400 µε; however, at the left peripheral region, the compression strain
had increased. The third pass resulted in an inhomogeneous residual strain distribution compared
to the previous passes (Figure 2c-C3). In the right peripheral region, the compression strain slightly
decreased to a level similar to that after the first pass, whilst in the left peripheral region, the strain
distribution showed alternating behavior.
     In summary, the C-ECAP process resulted in a relatively symmetric distribution of the residual
strains in all directions after the first and second pass. The largest strain gradient was in the axial
direction (Figure 2a), whilst in the radial direction (Figure 2b), the strain was homogenously distributed.
This symmetry was interrupted by the application of the third C-ECAP treatment on the material.

3.2. Microstructure: EBSD Results
     The observed grain orientation map, pole figures, grain size distribution, and fractions of the
low- and high-angle grain boundaries (LAGB and HAGB) of the initial state, after 1, 2, and 3 C-ECAP
passes are shown in Figures 4–7. Samples after the C-ECAP treatment were studied in three different
regions across the diameter, schematically shown in Figure 3. In this paper, the notation used at strain
scanning by neutron diffraction to describe the cylindrical sample reference system that was used
instead of the conventional axis notation used in material engineering (normal—ND, transverse—TD,
and rolling direction—RD). In the pole figures, the vertical axis represented the hoop direction (Hoop),
the horizontal axis represented the radial direction (Radial), and the normal of the pole figure plane
represented the axial (Axial) direction.
   Metals
Metals    2018,
       2018,     8, x FOR PEER REVIEW
             8, 1000                                                                                     7 of 2020
                                                                                                            7 of
   Metals 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                    7 of 20




   Figure 3. Scheme of the investigated regions with the Electron back-scatter diffraction (EBSD)
   method.                 theinvestigated
                Schemeofofthe  investigated regions
          3. 3.
     Figure
   Figure    Scheme                                 withthe
                                            regionswith  theElectron
                                                             Electronback-scatter diffraction
                                                                       back-scatter           (EBSD)
                                                                                     diffraction     method.
                                                                                                 (EBSD)
   method.




     Figure 4. Grain orientation maps, local micro-textures, grain size distributions, and the low- and
     high-angle grain boundaries (HAGB and LAGB) fractions of the initial state in the periphery (a) and in
     the center of the sample (b).
   Metals 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                              8 of 20

Metals 2018, 8, 1000
         Figure  4. Grain orientation maps, local micro-textures, grain size distributions, and the low- and high-     8 of 20
        angle grain boundaries (HAGB and LAGB) fractions of the initial state in the periphery (a) and in the
        center of the sample (b).
      In the initial state, the average grain sizes were in the µm domain (5–7 µm) and the grain shape
was approximately       equiaxed
        In the initial state,       in all the
                              the average         regions
                                              grain          (Figure
                                                      sizes were       4a,b).
                                                                   in the  μmIn   peripheral
                                                                                domain        region
                                                                                         (5–7 μm)       thethe
                                                                                                   and(a),      (0001
                                                                                                            grain      ) basal
                                                                                                                   shape
planes   were parallel to
   was approximately          the axial
                          equiaxed     in direction,     forming
                                           all the regions           four4a,b).
                                                                           distinct
                                                                (Figure              maxima, which
                                                                                 In peripheral  region were    between
                                                                                                        (a), the  (0001) the
                                                   
   basal
hoop     planes
       and       were
            radial      parallel toThe
                    directions.      the axial
                                            1010direction,
                                                     prismatic forming
                                                                   planesfour  distinct
                                                                            formed      maxima,
                                                                                      several     which in
                                                                                               maxima     were
                                                                                                             thebetween
                                                                                                                  peripheral
   the hoop
region:        and radial directions.
          one perpendicular       to the axial       (101̅0) prismatic
                                             The direction       and thenplanes      formed
                                                                             two which           ∼60◦maxima
                                                                                              several
                                                                                           were          inclinedinfrom
                                                                                                                      the the
   peripheral  region:  one   perpendicular      to  the  axial  direction  and   then two  which  were
axial direction of the sample. This so-called partial fiber texture is typical for extruded hexagonal     ~60°   inclined
   from the[27,28].
materials     axial direction   of the sample.
                      In the central     region (b),        so-called
                                                      Thisthe  texturepartial    fiber texture
                                                                         was completely        is typicalThe
                                                                                                           for (extruded
                                                                                             different.          0001) basal
   hexagonal   materials   [27,28].   In  the   central   region    (b),
                                                                     ◦   the  texture  was  completely
planes formed two distinct maxima which were ∼40 inclined from the axial direction. Furthermore,          different.  The
   (0001) basal planes formed two distinct maxima which were ~40° inclined from the axial direction.
in the peripheral region, the fraction of the HAGB was less than in the center of the sample, whilst the
   Furthermore, in the peripheral region, the fraction of the HAGB was less than in the center of the
fraction of the LAGB did not depend on the measured region.
   sample, whilst the fraction of the LAGB did not depend on the measured region.




      Figure  5. Grain orientation maps, local micro-textures, grain size distributions, and the HAGB and
        Figure 5. Grain orientation maps, local micro-textures, grain size distributions, and the HAGB and
      LAGB   fractions
        LAGB fractions ofofthe    sampleafter
                             thesample   afterthe   firstC-ECAP
                                               thefirst   C-ECAPpass  inthe
                                                                 passin  theperiphery
                                                                             periphery (a,c)  and in
                                                                                        (a,c) and    the center
                                                                                                  in the        of the
                                                                                                         center of
      sample  (b).
        the sample (b).

     After the first C-ECAP pass, significant grain refinement occurred in all the three regions,
where the maximum grain size distribution was at 0.8 µm. However, other local maxima could
be found at 2.7–3.7 µm (Figure 5a), 2.5–3.5 µm (Figure 5b), and 2 µm (Figure 5c). The microstructure
   Metals 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                    9 of 20
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                                         9 of 20
         After the first C-ECAP pass, significant grain refinement occurred in all the three regions, where
   the maximum grain size distribution was at 0.8 μm. However, other local maxima could be found at
was formed by a mixture of elongated and equiaxed grains. The dark areas in the EBSD maps were
   2.7–3.7 μm (Figure 5a), 2.5–3.5 μm (Figure 5b), and 2 μm (Figure 5c). The microstructure was formed
   by a with
places   mixturea confidence
                     of elongated index    (CI) < 0.1.grains.
                                     and equiaxed       Most The probably,    the higher
                                                                      dark areas              dislocation
                                                                                     in the EBSD            density
                                                                                                     maps were        caused
                                                                                                                         with poor
                                                                                                                  places        a
diffraction   patterns     in  these  areas.  The   local  micro-texture      in   the  center   (b)
   confidence index (CI) <0.1. Most probably, the higher dislocation density caused poor diffraction and  in the  right peripheral
region   (c) was
   patterns               areas. whilst
                    the same,
              in these           The localin the                in theregion
                                                  left peripheral
                                              micro-texture             center(a)      was
                                                                                (b)itand   inslightly
                                                                                              the rightdifferent.
                                                                                                         peripheralInregion
                                                                                                                      positions
                                                                                                                              (c) (b)
and   (c), the    0001
   was the same, whilst in the left peripheral region (a) it was slightly different. In positions (b) and (c), by
                (       )  basal  planes    formed    three    distinct   maxima:       along   the  hoop   axis  and  inclined
   ◦
45 the   ◦ from the axial direction, and then two on the radial axis perpendicular to the axial direction.
     –55(0001)     basal planes formed three distinct maxima: along the hoop axis and inclined by 45°–55°
The   firsthe
   from     mentioned             andcomponent
                            texture
              axial direction,          then two onwas       also observed
                                                       the radial                in other magnesium
                                                                     axis perpendicular                      alloys processed
                                                                                              to the axial direction.  The first by
   mentioned      texture   component       was  also
classical ECAP [29]. In the left peripheral region (c),observed     in  other  magnesium       alloys  processed
                                                                              e were two distinct maxima near       by classical
                                                                                                                          the edge
of ECAP
   the (0001[29].           left peripheral
                   In thefigure,
                ) pole             between region
                                               the hoop (c), and     were
                                                              therethe      twodirection.
                                                                                    distinct maxima
                                                                        radial                  However, nearthese
                                                                                                               the edge
                                                                                                                    maximaof the
                                                                                                                               were
   (0001)compared
blurred,     pole figure, to between
                              the sharp      hoop nd
                                       themaxima     in the   radial direction.
                                                         positions     (b) and (c), However,
                                                                                       and parthese    maxima
                                                                                                   of the maxima were  blurred,
                                                                                                                     area included
   compared
       a 45◦ –60 to◦ the sharp maxima       in positions             (c), and
                                                           (b) and The         part of     themaxima
                                                                                                  1010 area
                                                                                        inthe                  figures ineven
                                                                                                         poleincluded           a
                                                                                                       
even                  inclination   from the    axial direction.           maxima                                          position
   45°–60°   inclination     from  the   axial direction.    The  maxima     in   the   (101̅ 0) pole figures in position (a)
(a) and (b) had the same location, whilst in position (c), there was no sharp and unique maximum.
The      (b) had
   and1011    the same location, whilst in position (c), there was no sharp and unique maximum. The
               pole figures showed that hese planes had an almost homogenous distribution; however,
   (101̅1) pole figures showed that these planes had an almost homogenous distribution; however, in
in position (a), there was a local minimum in the surroundings of the axial direction. In addition,
   position (a), there was a local minimum in the surroundings of the axial direction. In addition, after
after the first C-ECAP pass, the sample exhibited a higher fraction of HAGBs in all the three regions
   the first C-ECAP pass, the sample exhibited a higher fraction of HAGBs in all the three regions than
than that in the initial state, which is typical for materials processed by ECAP [30,31].
   that in the initial state, which is typical for materials processed by ECAP [30,31].




      Figure 6. Grain orientation maps, local micro-textures, grain size distributions, and the HAGB and
      LAGB fractions of the sample after the second C-ECAP pass in the periphery (a,c) and in the center of
      the sample (b).
 Metals 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                        10 of 20


       Figure 6. Grain orientation maps, local micro-textures, grain size distributions, and the HAGB and
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                         10 of 20
       LAGB fractions of the sample after the second C-ECAP pass in the periphery (a,c) and in the center of
       the sample (b).
      According to grain size distributions of the sample after the second C-ECAP pass (Figure 6a–c),
      According
the maxima          to distributions
               of the  grain size distributions
                                      were at the   the sample
                                                 of same        after
                                                          position asthe  second
                                                                       they       C-ECAP
                                                                            had been   in thepass (Figure
                                                                                                    of the 6a–c),
                                                                                               case        sample
 the maxima    of  the distributions  were at the  same  position as  they had  been in the  case of
after the first pass. On the other hand, there were no other notable local maxima, indicating a more the sample
 after the first pass.
homogeneous                            hand, there
                        On the otheralthough,
                  microstructure,                 thewere no orientation
                                                       grain                 local showed
                                                             other notablemaps                indicating
                                                                                   maxima, some          a more
                                                                                                    larger  grains.
 homogeneous      microstructure,   although,  the grain orientation  maps  showed   some
From the (0001) pole figures, the maxima of the main texture component were blurred and ∼40 larger grains. From
                                                                                                             ◦ –75◦
 the (0001) pole figures, the maxima of the main texture component were blurred and ~40°–75°
inclined from the axial direction in all the three regions. If we compared the 1010 pole figures in
 inclined from the axial direction in all the three regions. If we compared the (101̅0) pole figures in
positions (a), (b), and (c), it could be noticed that the distribution of these planes was very similar.
 positions (a), (b), and (c), it could be noticed that the distribution of these planes was very similar.
Owing to these features, the sample after the second C-ECAP pass exhibited the same microstructure
 Owing to these features, the sample after the second C-ECAP pass exhibited the same microstructure
in positions (a), (b), and (c). The only difference between the investigated regions was in the fraction
 in positions (a), (b), and (c). The only difference between the investigated regions was in the fraction
of the HAGBs, which was, in respect to level and distribution, the same as in the sample after one
 of the HAGBs, which was, in respect to level and distribution, the same as in the sample after one C-
C-ECAP pass.
 ECAP pass.




      Figure 7. Grain orientation maps, local micro-textures, grain size distributions, and the HAGB and
       Figure 7. Grain orientation maps, local micro-textures, grain size distributions, and the HAGB and
      LAGB fractions of the sample after the third C-ECAP pass in the periphery (a,c), and in the center of
       LAGB fractions of the sample after the third C-ECAP pass in the periphery (a,c), and in the center of
      the sample (b).
       the sample (b).
     In Figure 7a–c the microstructural characteristics of the left peripheral, center, and right peripheral
regions of the sample after the third C-ECAP pass are shown, respectively. From the grain size
distributions, it was obvious that further grain refinement had occurred. Maxima were around 0.5 µm
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                              11 of 20



in all the three regions and the grains were equiaxed. In the grain orientation maps, large dark areas
                                                                                                        
with CI < 0.1 appeared, indicating high dislocation densities. The maxima of the (0001) and 1010
pole figures were nearly at the same position in all the three investigated regions. Nevertheless,
they were slightly different compared to the sample after two C-ECAP passes. The (0001) planes in
position (a), (b), and (c) formed blurred maxima, inclined 55◦ –85◦ from the axial direction. The maxima
               
of the 1010 pole figure were in the axial directions. In addition, the fraction of the HAGBs had
increased in all the regions (a), (b), and (c), compared to the previous cases.
      In summary, the sample after the first C-ECAP pass exhibited a heterogeneous local micro-texture.
The microstructure contained a mixture of elongated and equiaxed grains. However, there was
a slight difference in the grain size distribution between the central region and the peripheral regions.
Nevertheless, the fraction of the HAGBs had globally increased compared to the initial state. After the
second C-ECAP pass, the sample exhibited a relatively homogenous microstructure from the point
of view of local micro-texture and grain shape. There was no difference between the investigated
regions. The fraction of the HAGBs remained at the same level as it was after one C-ECAP pass.
The third C-ECAP pass resulted in the most homogeneous microstructure and it further increased
the fraction of the HAGBs. In addition, the character of the distribution of the HAGBs remained the
same, i.e., it increased from left to right through the sample. Black areas on the grain orientation maps
revealed the inhomogeneous dislocation density at particular regions of the samples after the first and
third pass.
                                                                                                 
      CP Ti primarily deforms by h ai slip on basal (0002), prismatic 1010 , or pyramidal 1011 planes
and by twinning on particular planes [32–34]. Moreover, it was shown that twinning in CP Ti played
an important role as one of the main deformation modes during conventional ECAP treatment at
elevated temperatures [35–38]. However, twins were not observed in our samples in the cross-section,
which did not necessarily mean that they were not present. Many conditions can influence the twin
activity and density in hcp materials. In reference [38], the authors showed that the maximum twin
density was achieved at 623K ECAP deformation temperature of CP Ti, whilst at 473 K, the twin
density was almost one-third of the maximum density. At an 873 K pressing temperature, the twin
density was 10 times lower and the twin width was below 0.1 µm.
      In reference [39], Palán et al. simulated the conditions which prevailed in the C-ECAP machine.
The authors results indicated that the temperature, the strain rate, and the velocity distribution were
very inhomogeneous in the die. Thus, for example, the temperature in the die could reach 800–850 K
where the twin density and width reached the minimum according to reference [38]. Our EBSD
observations were conducted at a 0.1 µm step size, which was approximately the width of the expected
twins at around 800–850 K deformation temperature. Hence, the EBSD measurement evaluation
software would not recognize the twins, rather it would report an error for the measured pixel instead.
Furthermore, the initial grain size could also influence the twinning activity as it was reported in
reference [40] for the Mg alloys and for Ti [41] (including the strain rate). Our starting material had
an average grain size of 5–7 µm, whilst in the above-mentioned experiments where twinning was
reported, the average grain size of the starting materials was several times larger than ours. Thus,
the relatively small initial grain size could probably have suppressed the formation of larger twins,
which could be observed by our experimental conditions.

3.3. X-ray Texture Measurements
     The results of the X-ray texture measurements of the samples after one, two, and three passes in
the three different regions of the sample (left peripheral-(a), center-(b), and right peripheral-(c)) are
shown in Figures 8–10. The axis notation was identical to the axis notation at the EBSD measurements.
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                                              12 of 20
       Metals 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                               12 of 20




                                                     
      Figure   8. (0002
            Figure       ), 1010
                    8. (0002),  (101    and
                                     ,̅ 0), and1011       polefigures
                                                  (101̅1)pole          afterthe
                                                               figures after       first
                                                                             thefirst    C-ECAP
                                                                                      C-ECAP passpass
                                                                                                 in thein the periphery
                                                                                                        periphery (a,c), (a,c),
              theincentral
      and inand             region
                    the central region      ofofthe
                                       (b)(b)     thesample.
                                                      sample.

      FromFrom      simulated
              the the    simulated(0002
                                      (0002)) pole     figures atathe
                                                 pole figures         the   peripheral
                                                                         peripheral  regionsregions
                                                                                                (Figure(Figure     8a,c)
                                                                                                          8a,c) after     afterC-the first
                                                                                                                      the first
      ECAP    pass,   the  (0002)   basal   planes   parallel  to
C-ECAP pass, the (0002) basal planes parallel to the axial direction formed maxima on theofedge
                                                                  the   axial direction formed      maxima    on the  edge     the of the
      (0002)    pole    figures.  These     components       would      be  indicated   as   “parallel”
(0002) pole figures. These components would be indicated as “parallel” components in the following         components      in  the
      following text. Moreover, (0002) planes formed other maxima inclined at ~50°–60° from the axial
text. Moreover, (0002) planes formed other maxima inclined at ∼50◦ –60◦ from the axial direction and
      direction and distributed between the hoop and radial axis. However, the arrangement was in the
distributed    between the hoop and radial axis. However, the arrangement was in the opposite sense
      opposite sense and it was rotated to hoop axis by ~120°–130° around the axial direction. This texture
and itcomponent
        was rotated  wouldto hoop
                              be notedaxis   the ∼
                                         as by      120◦ –130
                                                  “50°–60°”
                                                                  ◦ around the axial direction. This texture component
                                                               component.      The texture component “50°–60°” was also
wouldobserved
        be noted                   ◦ –60◦ ” component. The texture component “50◦ –60◦ ” was also observed in
                      ourthe
                  in as    EBSD“50investigation     (Figure 5). The same texture component was seen in the (0002)
our EBSD     investigation
      pole figure                (Figure
                     in the central   region      The same
                                             5).(Figure          texture
                                                          8b), but  it lay oncomponent
                                                                                the hoop axis.wasInseen     in the this
                                                                                                      this region,   (0002
                                                                                                                         was) pole
                                                                                                                               the figure
      only  notable    maximum,      and   parallel  components       were   not present.   The
in the central region (Figure 8b), but it lay on the hoop axis. In this region, this was the only only  notable   maxima    in the notable
      (101̅0) pole figures were inclined at ~ 25°–35° from the axial direction; however, the overall 
maximum, and parallel components were not present. The only notable maxima in the 1010 pole
      distribution of the maxima formed a ring around the axial direction. The position arrangement of the
figures were inclined at ∼25◦ –35◦ from the axial direction; however, the overall distribution of the
      maxima around the axial direction was in the opposite sense, as it was present at the (0002) pole
maxima    formed
      figures.         a ring around
                The maxima      formed by        axial
                                           the(101 ̅ 0) direction.
                                                         were in an axialThedirection
                                                                               positionindependently
                                                                                          arrangementfrom     of the   measured around
                                                                                                                   the maxima
the axial  direction
      region; however,   was   in the   opposite      sense,   as  it was    present   at  the   ( 0002 )  pole  figures.   The maxima
                        the random distribution of the planes inclined by 35°–55° from the axial direction
formed   by 1010
      forming    a ring were
                          in thein               direction
                                    an axialregions.
                                 peripheral                Theindependently
                                                                most intense maxima from of    themeasured
                                                                                             the     (0002) and     (101̅1)however,
                                                                                                                 region;      pole     the
      figures  were    in the central  region    (Figure   8b) and    ◦
                                                                     at  the◦same  time,  the  least
random distribution of the planes inclined by 35 –55 from the axial direction forming a ring in the   intense  maximum      of the
      (101̅0)regions.
               pole figure Thewas         found here.
                                    alsointense
                                                                                                 
peripheral                      most               maxima of the (0002) and 1011 pole figures were in the central
                                                                                                                
region (Figure 8b) and at the same time, the least intense maximum of the 1010 pole figure was also
found here.
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                                              13 of 20
       Metals 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                               13 of 20




                                                
       Figure 9. (0002   ), 1010 , and 1011 pole figures after the second C-ECAP pass in the periphery (a,c)
            Figure 9. (0002), (101̅0), and (101̅1) pole figures after the second C-ECAP pass in the periphery
       and in      central
               theand
            (a,c)     in the region         theofsample.
                                     (b) of (b)
                             central region        the sample.

      The result     of texture
             The result  of texturemeasurements
                                    measurements on         thesample
                                                        onthe      sample      after
                                                                            after the the  second
                                                                                       second        C-ECAP
                                                                                                C-ECAP            pass
                                                                                                           pass was      was in
                                                                                                                      visible   visible in
Figure   9a–c.9a–c.
      Figure      In the      peripheral regions
                           peripheral
                      In the                          ((a)and
                                           regions ((a)     and    (c)),
                                                                 (c)),  thethe  simulated
                                                                            simulated     (0002)
                                                                                               (0002     pole figures
                                                                                                   pole) figures  showedshowed
                                                                                                                            that      that
“50◦ –60  ◦ ” components
      “50°–60°”    componentswere       almost exactly
                                  werealmost       exactly at at
                                                              thethesame    position
                                                                          same        as theyas
                                                                                  position      were in the
                                                                                                  they   were sample
                                                                                                                 in theafter  the
                                                                                                                          sample     after
            pass, whilst
      firstpass,
the first          whilst“parallel”
                            “parallel” components
                                           components  werewereslightly              In the central
                                                                           rotated.rotated.
                                                                        slightly               In theregion
                                                                                                        central(Figure
                                                                                                                  region9b),(Figure
                                                                                                                              the      9b),
      “50°–60°”
         ◦      ◦  component was rotated counterclockwise to the hoop axis by ~20° around                          ◦  the axial
the “50 –60 ” component was rotated counterclockwise to the hoop axis by ∼20 around the axial
      direction, with respect to the position of the maximum after the first pass, and its intensity increased
direction,   with respect to the position of the maximum after the first pass, and its intensity increased as
      as well. The inclination of the maxima from the axial direction in the (101̅0) pole figures was the
      The inclination
well. same    as they wereofinthethemaxima
                                     first pass,from          were direction
                                                       the axial
                                                   but they                        in the 1010
                                                                       rotated clockwise             pole figures
                                                                                              by ~25°–35°    around was     the same as
                                                                                                                      the axial
they direction
      were in the      first pass,  but they      were The
                                                         rotated       clockwise          ∼25
                                                                                     by̅ 1)     ◦    ◦ around the axial direction
                  compared    to previous   positions.        maxima       in the (101       pole–35
                                                                                                  figure  were still xactly in
                                                                                  
compared
      the axialto previous     positions.
                  direction; however,        The density
                                          higher    maxima       in theinclined
                                                             regions        1011 by     ~35°–50°
                                                                                     pole           werethe
                                                                                            figure from     still exactly
                                                                                                                axial        in the axial
                                                                                                                      direction
      appeared    in the  peripheral  regions    ((b) and  (c)).                   ◦     ◦
direction; however, higher density regions inclined by ∼35 –50 from the axial direction appeared in
the peripheral regions ((b) and (c)).
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                                                      14 of 20
        Metals 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                      14 of 20




                                                   
       Figure 10. (0002), 1010 ̅, and 1011̅ pole figures after the third C-ECAP pass in the periphery (a,c)
            Figure 10. (0002), (1010), and (1011) pole figures after the third C-ECAP pass in the periphery (a,c)
       and in   incentral
              the
            and            region
                   the central                 thesample.
                                    (b)(b)ofofthe
                               region              sample.

      Figure    10a–c
             Figure       revealed
                       10a–c                furthertexture
                              revealedfurther                     evolutionafter
                                                        texture evolution       afterthethe   third
                                                                                          third        C-ECAP
                                                                                                  C-ECAP       pass. pass.
                                                                                                                      A much   A weaker
                                                                                                                                  much weaker
intensity,    thanthan
      intensity,      in the
                          in the   previouspass,
                                previous                  couldbebeseen
                                                  pass, could           seenin in
                                                                               thethe    (0002
                                                                                    (0002)       ) pole
                                                                                               pole   figurefigure
                                                                                                                in thein   the position
                                                                                                                        position   of the of the
    ◦    ◦
      “50°–60°”     texture  component         in  the  left peripheral  region   (a), though    it was
“50 –60 ” texture component in the left peripheral region (a), though it was still present. The opposite  still  present.  The  opposite
couldcould     be observed
       be observed        in the    the right
                                in right            peripheral
                                             peripheral           region
                                                                       (c) (c)
                                                              region           where
                                                                           where    thethe“50  ◦ –60◦ ” texture
                                                                                             “50°–60°”      texture component
                                                                                                                       component had   had gained
      gained intensity compared to the previous pass. The basal component exhibited a much stronger
intensity compared to the previous pass. The basal component exhibited a much stronger intensity
      intensity in the left peripheral region (a), whilst in the right peripheral region (c), the intensity
in the left peripheral region (a), whilst in the right peripheral region (c), the intensity maintained the
      maintained the same level. The most intensive “50°–60°” texture component could be observed in the
       level. region
samecentral     The most       intensive
                         (b), and               “50◦did
                                     its position      –60◦not” texture
                                                                 change in    comparisoncould
                                                                          component          to thebe     observed
                                                                                                       previous     pass.inThe
                                                                                                                             theposition
                                                                                                                                  central region
(b), and             in the did
           its position
      of maxima              (101̅not
                                    0) polechangefiguresin in
                                                            comparison        to the((a)
                                                               peripheral regions          and (c)) pass.
                                                                                       previous       coincidedThewith
                                                                                                                     position      of maxima in
                                                                                                                           the positions
             
the 1010
      after thepole    figures
                   first C-ECAP   in peripheral
                                       pass. However,     regions    ((a) andintensity
                                                               the maxima        (c)) coincided        with the
                                                                                           was stronger,             positions
                                                                                                                 especially        after
                                                                                                                                       leftthe first
                                                                                                                              in the
C-ECAPperipheral     region (a), where
            pass. However,         the maxima the intensity     reached
                                                         intensity    wasthe   maximum
                                                                            stronger,       of the scale.
                                                                                         especially           In the
                                                                                                         in the    leftsame   region (a),
                                                                                                                        peripheral      region (a),
      the   (101̅ 1) planes formed three distinct notable maxima which were inclined by ~30°–40°from the
where the intensity reached the maximum of the scale. In the same region (a), the 1011 planes formed
      axial direction. On the other side of the sample (Figure 10c),                      except the clear maxima in the axial
three distinct notable maxima which were                        inclined by ∼30◦ –40◦ from the axial direction. On the other
      direction, the distribution of the (101̅1) planes inclined by ~30°–40° from the axial direction formed
side of  the sample
      blurred
                           (Figure 10c), except the clear maxima in the axial direction, the distribution of the
                regions with a higher intensity in the (101̅1) pole figure (c). The same held for the (101̅1)
                                           30◦ –40     ◦ from the axial direction formed blurred regions with a higher
       
 1011poleplanes
             figureinclined       by ∼
                     in the central     region     (b); however,    three regions could be spotted           with more clear edges.
                                                                                                   
intensity Thein the     1011 pole figure
                   above-discussed         results(c). canThehelpsame    held for
                                                                   to illustrate   thethe   1011 orientation
                                                                                        preferred      pole figureininthe         central region
                                                                                                                             thedifferent
(b); however, three regions could be spotted with more clear edges.
      regions    of  the  samples.      It  could     be  observed,    that  the  C-ECAP      mechanical        treatment    resulted    in
      different   textures   in  the   different     regions.   However,     the “50°–60°”     component
      The above-discussed results can help to illustrate the preferred orientation in the different             was  present    in all the
regions of the samples. It could be observed, that the C-ECAP mechanical treatment resulted in
different textures in the different regions. However, the “50◦ –60◦ ” component was present in all the
regions, the rotation with respect to the radial axis was dependent on the region and the number of
passes. The theoretical shear plane normal was inclined by 45◦ from the extrusion-axial direction
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                                              15 of 20
      Metals 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                   15 of 20

due to    the C-ECAP
      regions,  the rotationdesign.           assumed,
                                       If we to
                               with respect      the radialforaxisexample,     after the
                                                                   was dependent            first
                                                                                        on the      passand
                                                                                                 region    in the    central of
                                                                                                               the number       region,
that the   main
      passes.  Thedeformation       mode
                     theoretical shear      wasnormal
                                         plane   a dislocation     slip by
                                                         was inclined   in the    basalthe
                                                                            45° from      (0002   ) planes indirection
                                                                                             extrusion-axial      directiondue1120 ,
then to  the C-ECAPthe
      theoretically      design.  If wecomponent
                                         assumed, forinexample,
                             “50–60”                       the (0002after the first
                                                                       ) pole    figurepass in the central
                                                                                          should              region,
                                                                                                     be inclined         that the
                                                                                                                      exactly    by 45◦
      main   deformation     mode    was  a dislocation  slip  in the basal   (0002)     planes   in direction     〈112̅ 0〉, then
from the axial direction and fully located on the hoop axis. However, in our results, the maximum in
      theoretically
the (0002                   figure component
                      the “50–60”   appeared atinathe ∼55(0002)    pole figure
                                                            ◦ inclination.        should           may exactly
                                                                                           be inclined              by 45° from
            ) basal pole                                                      This   deviation            be explained       citing the
      the axial direction and fully located on the hoop axis. However, in our results, the maximum in the
results of Prangnell et. al. [42], where the authors showed with the help of finite element modelling
      (0002) basal pole figure appeared at a ~55° inclination. This deviation may be explained citing the
that the filling of the outer corner of the die in conventional ECAP was dependent on whether the
      results of Prangnell et. al. [42], where the authors showed with the help of finite element modelling
      thatbetween
friction    the fillingthe  material
                         of the         and the
                                outer corner   of die  wall
                                                  the die   in was   present. ECAP
                                                                conventional      The present       outer curvature
                                                                                         was dependent        on whether     ofthe
                                                                                                                                the die
corner   could   theoretically    change    the  real shear    plane,  which      resulted    in  a slightly
      friction between the material and the die wall was present. The present outer curvature of the die       different     observed
macro-texture
      corner could  from              change thepredicted
                           the theoretically
                      theoretically               real shear one
                                                               plane,  the material.
                                                                    ofwhich     resulted inThe   material
                                                                                              a slightly     flow in
                                                                                                          different       the die was
                                                                                                                       observed
also simulated
      macro-texture in reference                  it turned one
                                    [43], where predicted
                        from the theoretically                      that
                                                               out of theits  distribution
                                                                           material.            was highly
                                                                                        The material     flow in dependent
                                                                                                                    the die wason the
valuealso   simulated
       of the  frictionincoefficient.
                           reference [43],  where it turned
                                         Furthermore,          out that itsatdistribution
                                                          as discussed         the end ofwas       highly
                                                                                             Section    3.2,dependent
                                                                                                             differenton       the
                                                                                                                            conditions
      value in
prevailed     of different
                  the friction   coefficient.
                              parts            Furthermore,
                                     of the C-ECAP       machine.as discussed
                                                                      In reference at the[39]     of section
                                                                                           end(Figure      2), it3.2.,
                                                                                                                   wasdifferent
                                                                                                                          shown that
in theconditions
        corners and prevailed   in different
                          the adjacent        parts
                                           areas, theof strain
                                                        the C-ECAP      machine.
                                                                 rate and    velocity In reference
                                                                                          distribution[39] (Figure     2), it was zero.
                                                                                                            was practically
      shown that in the corners and the adjacent areas, the strain rate and velocity distribution was
This may be additional evidence that the real shear plane can be different from the predicted one
      practically zero. This may be additional evidence that the real shear plane can be different from the
(Figure 11).
      predicted one (Figure 11).




                                     Figure 11. Simulated strain rate, as in reference [39].
                                       Figure 11. Simulated strain rate, as in reference [39].

      In summary,
            In summary, it can        concluded
                                  be be
                             it can      concludedthat      the activity
                                                       thatthe   activity of         particular
                                                                                theparticular
                                                                            ofthe                   slip
                                                                                                 slip      system
                                                                                                       system         depended
                                                                                                                 depended      on theon the
number     of  passes    and    the   relative    position    within    the   specimen.      After     the
      number of passes and the relative position within the specimen. After the first pass in the central    first pass    in  the  central
region,   the basal
      region,          slipslip
               the basal     system        〈112̅0〉(0002
                                 system 1120              ) was
                                                     (0002)   wasthe    dominant slip mode. However, in the peripheral
                                                                   the dominant slip mode. However, in the peripheral
      regions,
regions,         the prismatic
           the prismatic          slip
                               slip    system 1120
                                     system       〈112̅0〉 (101 ̅ 0) and
                                                            1010          pyramidalslip
                                                                     and pyramidal           system
                                                                                          slip  system  of the  firstfirst
                                                                                                            of the            〈112̅0〉1120
                                                                                                                      orderorder
         ̅
 1011(101   1) were
         were          activated,
                  activated,         which
                                 which        couldbebededuced
                                          could          deduced fromfrom thethepositions
                                                                                  positions  ofofthethe
                                                                                                      maxima
                                                                                                          maxima  of the
                                                                                                                       of measured
                                                                                                                          the measured
pole pole   figures.
      figures.        In the
                   In the           case,i.e.,
                              firstcase,
                           first                 the basal
                                           i.e., the  basalslip
                                                             slip        central
                                                                    thethe
                                                                 in in            region
                                                                             central       after the
                                                                                       region     afterfirst
                                                                                                          thepass  (Figure
                                                                                                                first pass 8b),   the 8b),
                                                                                                                              (Figure
      maximum of the “50–60” component in the (0002) pole figure lay fully on the hoop axis and was
the maximum of the “50–60” component in the (0002) pole figure lay fully on the hoop axis and
      inclined by 55° from the axial direction. Thus, the (0002) basal planes were parallel with the
was inclined by 55◦ from the axial direction. Thus, the (0002) basal planes were parallel with the
      mentioned other shear plane and preferably oriented for shear deformation in the vertical direction
mentioned      other shear plane and preferably oriented for shear deformation in the vertical direction on
      on the shear plane. In the second case, i.e., the prismatic and pyramidal first order slip in the
the shear    plane.             second
                      In the8a,c),
      periphery (Figure                    case, i.e.,
                                     the maxima         the“50–60”
                                                    of the   prismatic     and pyramidal
                                                                       component                 first order
                                                                                      of the (0002)              slip in
                                                                                                         pole figure    wasthe  periphery
                                                                                                                             rotated
(Figure   8a,c),from
                   the maxima
                        the hoop of     theon“50–60”      component        ofofthe  (0002̅) pole figure was rotated byby~120◦
      by ~120°                        axis      each side.  The maxima          the (1010) pole figures were inclined          ◦ from the
from ~30°
       the hoop
             from axis   on each
                    the axial        side. The
                                direction          maximabyof~60°
                                             and rotated                1010 the
                                                                 the from        pole
                                                                                   hoopfigures    werearrangement
                                                                                           axis. This     inclined by of  ∼30texture
axial maxima
       directionallowed      slipping
                    and rotated       by 〈𝑎〉    ◦ from the hoop
                                          ∼60dislocations               prismatic
                                                              in theaxis.            and in pyramidal
                                                                              This arrangement                           [44] in allowed
                                                                                                               planesmaxima
                                                                                                        of texture                the
      direction   towards    the  center   of the  work-piece.    This  was   due  to the  fact that
slipping h ai dislocations in the prismatic and in pyramidal planes [44] in the direction towards the in  peripheral    regions,  the
centershear   direction
         of the          had a normal
                  work-piece.       This wascomponent
                                                  due to to  thefact
                                                           the    edge   of the
                                                                      that       die beside the
                                                                             in peripheral         verticalthe
                                                                                                regions,      one.shear
                                                                                                                    Consequently,
                                                                                                                           direction had
a normal component to the edge of the die beside the vertical one. Consequently, the stress fields of the
different types of dislocations (basal, prismatic, and pyramidal) differently affected the residual strain
distribution in particular regions. Obviously, a very large amount of basal dislocations was generated
   Metals 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                    16 of 20


       stress
  the 2018,
Metals         fields of the different types of dislocations (basal, prismatic, and pyramidal) differently
            8, 1000                                                                                   16 of 20
   affected the residual strain distribution in particular regions. Obviously, a very large amount of basal
   dislocations was generated during the first pass owing to the initial texture in the central region
during   the4b).
   (Figure    firstThis   owing to
                    passresulted     in the  initial
                                         a large     texture in the
                                                  compression         central
                                                                  residual      region
                                                                             strain     (Figure
                                                                                    in the axial 4b).   This resulted
                                                                                                   direction              in a large
                                                                                                                (Figure 2a-C1).
compression      residual   strain    in  the  axial   direction  (Figure   2a-C1).   After  the
   After the second pass, the prismatic and pyramidal dislocations also appeared beside the basal second      pass,  the prismatic
andislocations
     pyramidaldue   dislocations       also appeared                                                                         ◦ –60◦ ”
                         to the rotated        “50°–60°”beside     the basal
                                                             component.     Thisdislocations
                                                                                   coexistencedue of to   the rotated
                                                                                                       basal,            “50and
                                                                                                                prismatic,
component.       This coexistence
   pyramidal dislocations                     basal,region
                                  in theofcentral              couldand
                                                       prismatic,         pyramidal
                                                                      be observed       dislocations
                                                                                     after  the third pass in theas central
                                                                                                                    well. Inregion
                                                                                                                              the
could   be observed
   periphery,    only theafter   the third
                           prismatic      andpass     as well.
                                                pyramidal        In the periphery,
                                                              dislocations             only
                                                                             were active      thethe
                                                                                           after   prismatic
                                                                                                       first andand     pyramidal
                                                                                                                   second   pass.
   They generated
dislocations    were active        field,the
                         stressafter       which
                                              first acted  in the hoop
                                                    and second     pass.direction    mainly after
                                                                          They generated              the field,
                                                                                                a stress    first C-ECAP     pass in
                                                                                                                   which acted
the(Figure  2b). However,
     hoop direction      mainly after        second
                                        the the
                                     after        firstpass, they acted
                                                        C-ECAP            in the axial
                                                                   pass (Figure     2b).direction
                                                                                          However,   as well
                                                                                                         after(Figure    2a,b).pass,
                                                                                                                 the second     It
   could   be  assumed,    that   the   grain   size  influenced   the  dislocations   effects  in  the  different
they acted in the axial direction as well (Figure 2a,b). It could be assumed, that the grain size influenced          directions.
theAfter              pass, they
          the third effects
     dislocations              in thewere    only active
                                          different        in the right
                                                      directions.   Afterperiphery       can be
                                                                            the thirdaspass,             fromonly
                                                                                                  seenwere
                                                                                               they              the maxima
                                                                                                                      active inofthe
       (0002)
   theperiphery   and   (101̅ 0) seen     figures
                                    pole from    the(Figure   10a,c).                          
right                as can be                         maxima    of the (0002) and 1010 pole figures (Figure 10a,c).

3.4.3.4. Residual
      Residual           CalculationRresults
                  StressCalculation
               Stress                Rresults
        The
      The    residualstress
           residual           wascalculated
                       stresswas                 using the
                                    calculated using                   describedininsection
                                                             method described
                                                        the method                     Section2.2.EBSD
                                                                                                    EBSDandandX-ray
                                                                                                                X-ray
   texture measurements were conducted in the three regions (left and right peripheral regions, and the
texture measurements were conducted in the three regions (left and right peripheral regions, and the
   central region) of the samples; hence, the calculation was provided for each of the three investigated
central region) of the samples; hence, the calculation was provided for each of the three investigated
   regions and passes with separate ODFs. The grain shapes for particular regions and passes were
regions and passes with separate ODFs. The grain shapes for particular regions and passes were
   determined from our EBSD results in the cross section and from reference [39] in the longitudinal
determined from our EBSD results in the cross section and from reference [39] in the longitudinal
   section of the samples. The grain size and shape did not depend significantly on the region in the
section  of the samples. The grain size and shape did not depend significantly on the region in the
   sample for particular passes, as seen in section 3.2. Thus, it could be assumed that the same statement
sample         as well forpasses,
         for particular
   was valid                      as seen
                           the axial       in Section
                                      direction.         −3,Thus,
                                                 Points3.2.                      assumed
                                                                   it couldtobethe
                                                             −2 belonged                    that theregion,
                                                                                   left peripheral   same statement
                                                                                                            −1, 1, 1
was  valid  as well for  the axial direction.  Points  −  3, − 2 belonged   to  the left peripheral
   to the central region, and 2, 3 to the right peripheral region. The results of the calculation     region, −1,in1, 1
                                                                                                        are seen
   the central
to Figure       region,
           12a–c.        and  2, 3 to the right  peripheral   region.   The  results  of the calculation  are  seen in
Figure 12a–c.




      Figure 12. Residual stress distribution in the axial (a), hoop (b), and the radial (c) direction of the
      samples after the first, second, and the third C-ECAP pass.
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                 17 of 20



      It could be seen from the stress distributions (Figure 12a–c), that the distributions followed almost
the same shape as the strain distributions from Section 3.1 (Figure 2a–c). In the center of the sample
C1 in the axial direction (Figure 12a), a relatively large, −63 MPa, stress prevailed, as was expected
from the strain measurements. In the left peripheral region, the C1 sample exhibited +14 MPa tensile
stress, whilst the right peripheral region was practically stress-free in the axial direction in contrast to
the measured compression strain (Figure 2a). It was interesting to see the change of sign between the
strain and the stress at points −3, −2, and 2 mm. At points −3, −2, and 2 mm, the strain was −17, −39,
and −82 µε, respectively, but the stress was +14, +14, and +2 MPa. The same behavior was spotted
at point −3 in the C2 sample (Figure 12a) and at points 2 and 3 mm in the sample C3 in the radial
direction (Figure 12c). Sample C2 exhibited a very symmetric distribution of axial stresses around
the center of the sample with the maximum of compression stress at −37 MPa. The compression
stress increased from the edges towards the center of the sample C2. The C3 sample showed a large,
−63 MPa, stress at the right peripheral point −3 mm. In the central region (−1, 0, and 1 mm) and in
the right peripheral region (1 and 2 mm) the residual compression stress decreased.
      In the hoop direction (Figure 12b), samples C1 and C2 showed a very symmetric distribution
of stresses around the center; however, it was in opposite progress than it was in the axial direction.
These samples had the lowest value of compression stress in the center and it increased towards the
edges. Sample C1 seemed to be stress-free in the center. Sample C3 showed a linearly increasing
compression stress from the left to the right edge in the hoop direction.
      The residual compression stresses did not show any gradient in the radial direction for samples
C1 and C2, though at point −3 mm it was slightly increased (Figure 12c), and they were distributed
at around −18 MPa. Additionally, a very inhomogeneous distribution could be seen at sample C3.
Its maximum compression stress was at point −1 mm. From this point, the stress decreased towards
the right edge of the sample until its sign changed between points 1 and 2 mm. The right edge of the
sample exhibited tensile stress at about +20 MPa.

4. Conclusions
     Neutron diffraction measurements revealed the residual strain distributions of the samples after
one, two, and three passes of the C-ECAP machine. Symmetric strain gradients were present in the
case of samples after first and second pass in the axial and hoop directions. In the radial direction,
there was no gradient and also the strain distribution was constant through the sample. The third
pass broke the gradient symmetry in the axial and hoop direction. Moreover, in the radial direction,
the constant strain distribution was interrupted as well.
     EBSD observations confirmed the grain refinement effect of multiple pass C-ECAP treatment;
however, after the second pass, the grain refinement was not as significant as after the first pass.
Deformation twins were not observed, though twins with nano-sized width may have been present.
Thus, it is most likely that a dislocation slip was responsible for the deformation of the Ti during the
C-ECAP treatment. This concept was supported by the experimental pole figures from the EBSD
measurements and the local X-ray macro-texture measurements. In addition, the macro-texture of
the samples was dependent on the investigated region, which could indicate the activation and
combination of different slip systems as the function of the position in the work-piece.
     The calculation of the residual stress distributions showed that compression residual stresses
prevailed in the specimens after the C-ECAP process and they followed the shape of the distributions
of the residual strains.

Author Contributions: K.M. and G.N. conceived and designed the experiments; J.P. and M.D. prepared the
C-ECAPed materials; C.H. performed the neutron diffraction experiments; G.N. prepared the samples for EBSD
and X-ray texture measurements; K.H. studied microstructure of the samples using EBSD; P.C. performed the
X-ray texture measurements; G.N. and K.M. analyzed the data; G.N. wrote the paper.
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful for the support from the Czech Science Foundation [GB14-36566G],
and the Operational Programme Research, Development and Education, The Ministry of Education, Youth
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                            18 of 20



and Sports (OP RDE, MEYS) [CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_013/0001794]. Neutron diffraction measurements were
performed with the support of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (CANAM infrastructure of the NPI
CAS Rez—project No. LM2011019, and infrastructure “Reactors LVR-15 and LR-0”—project No. LM2015074).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Elias, C.N.; Lima, H.C.J.; Valiev, R.Z.; Meyers, M.A. Biomedical applications of titanium and its alloys, JOM:
      The journal of the Minerals. Met. Mater. Soc. 2008, 60, 46–49. [CrossRef]
2.    Lotkov, A.I.; Baturin, A.A.; Grishkov, V.N.; Kopylov, V.I. Possible role of crystal structure defects in grain
      structure nanofragmentation under severe cold plastic deformation of metals and alloys. Phys. Mesomech.
      2007, 10, 179–189. [CrossRef]
3.    Semenova, I.P.; Modina, J.M.; Polyakov, A.V.; Klevtsov, G.V.; Klevtsova, N.A.; Pigaleva, I.N.; Valiev, R.Z.;
      Langdon, T.G. Fracture toughness at cryogenic temperatures of ultrafine-grained Ti-6Al-4V alloy processed
      by ECAP. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2018, 716, 260–267. [CrossRef]
4.    Stolyarov, V.V.; Alexandrov, I.V.; Valiev, R.Z.; Zhu, Y.T.; Lowe, T.C. Grain refinement and properties of pure
      Ti processed by warm ECAP and cold rolling. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2003, 343, 43–50. [CrossRef]
5.    Dyakonov, G.S.; Mironov, S.; Semenova, I.P.; Valiev, R.Z.; Semiatin, S.L. Microstructure evolution and
      strengthening mechanisms in commercial-purity titanium subjected to equal-channel angular pressing.
      Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2017, 701, 289–301. [CrossRef]
6.    Vinogradov AYu Stolyarov, V.V.; Hashimoto, S.; Valiev, R.Z. Cyclic behavior of ultrafine-grain titanium
      produced by severe plastic deformation. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2001, 318, 163–173. [CrossRef]
7.    Dyakonov, G.S.; Zemtsova, E.; Mironov, S.; Semenova, I.P.; Valiev, R.Z.; Semiatin, S.L. An EBSD investigation
      of ultrafine-grain titanium for biomedical applications. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2015, 648, 305–310. [CrossRef]
8.    Jäger, A.; Gärtnerova, V.; Tesař, K. Microstructure and anisotropy of the mechanical properties in
      commercially pure titanium after equal channel angular pressing with back pressure at room temperature.
      Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2015, 644, 114–120. [CrossRef]
9.    Raab, G.J.; Valiev, R.Z.; Lowe, T.C.; Zhu, Y.T. Continuous processing of ultrafine grained Al by
      ECAP-Conform. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2004, 382, 30–34. [CrossRef]
10.   Medvedev, A.; Ng, H.P.; Lapovok, R.; Estrin, Y.; Lowe, T.C.; Anumalasetty, V.N. Comparison of
      laboratory-scale and industrial-scale equal channel angular pressing of commercial purity titanium.
      Mater. Lett. 2015, 145, 308–311. [CrossRef]
11.   Djavanroodi, F.; Omranpour, B.; Ebrahimi, M.; Sedighi, M. Designing of ECAP parameters based on strain
      distribution uniformity. Prog. Nat. Sci. Mater. Int. 2012, 22, 452–460. [CrossRef]
12.   Tong, Y.; Dmowski, W.; Witczak, Z.; Chuang, C.-P.; Egami, T. Residual elastic strain induced by equal channel
      angular pressing on bulk metallic glasses. Acta Mater. 2013, 61, 1204–1209. [CrossRef]
13.   Webster, G.A.; Wimpory, R.C. Non-destructive measurement of residual stress by neutron diffraction. J. Mater.
      Process. Technol. 2001, 117, 395–399. [CrossRef]
14.   Holmberg, J.; Steuwer, A.; Stormvinter, A.; Kristoffersen, H.; Haakanen, M.; Berglund, J. Residual stress state
      in an induction hardened steel bar determined by synchrotron- and neutron diffraction compared to results
      from lab-XRD. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2016, 667, 199–207. [CrossRef]
15.   Vidal, V.; Thilly, L.; Van Petegem, S.; Stuhr, U.; Lecouturier, F.; Renault, P.-O.; Van Swygenhoven, H. Plasticity
      of nanostructured Cu-Nb-based wires: Strengthening mechanisms revealed by in situ deformation under
      neutrons. Scr. Mater. 2009, 60, 171–174. [CrossRef]
16.   Lee, H.H.; Gangwar, K.D.; Park, K.-T.; Woo, W.; Kim, H.S. Neutron diffraction and finite element analysis of
      the residual stress distribution of copper processed by equal-channel angular pressing. Mater. Sci. Eng. A
      2017, 682, 691–697. [CrossRef]
17.   Kubina, T.; Dlouhý, J.; Kövér, M.; Hodek, J. Study of Thermal Stability of Ultra Fine-Grained Commercially
      Pure Titanium Wire Prepared in Conform Equipment. Mater. Sci. Forum 2014, 782, 415–420. [CrossRef]
18.   Valiev, R.Z.; Langdon, T.G. Principles of equal-channel angular pressing as a processing tool for grain
      refinement. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2006, 51, 881–981. [CrossRef]
19.   Mikula, P. Past and present status of neutron scattering at the research reactor in Řež. Mater. Struct. 2006, 13,
      51–62.
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                           19 of 20



20.   Hervoches, C.H.; Mikula, P.; Vrána, M. Recent instrumentation upgrades on the residual strain/stress
      diffractometer at NPI-Řež. In Proceedings of the 53rd International Scientific Conference on Experimental
      Stress Analysis (EAN 2015), Český Krumlov, Czech Republic, 1–4 June 2015; pp. 119–120.
21.   Hutchings, M.T.; Withers, P.J.; Holden, T.M.; Lorentzen, T. Introduction to the Characterization of Residual
      Stresses by Neutron Diffraction; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2005; Chapter 3.6.4.; ISBN 9780415310000.
22.   Bachmann, F.; Hielscher, R.; Schaeben, H. Texture analysis with mtex—Free and open source software
      toolbox. Solid State Phenom. 2010, 160, 63–68. [CrossRef]
23.   Gnäupel-Herold, T. ISODEC: Software for calculating diffraction elastic constants. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2012,
      45, 573–574. [CrossRef]
24.   Kröner, E. Berechnung der elastischen Konstanten des Vielkristalls aus den Konstanten des Einkristalls.
      Zeitschrift für Physik 1958, 151, 504–518. [CrossRef]
25.   Bollenrath, F.; Hauk, V.; Müller, E.H. Zur Berechnung der vielkristallinen Elastizitäts-konstanten aus den
      Werten des Einkristalls. Z. Metallkunde 1967, 58, 76–82.
26.   Behnken, H.; Hauk, V. Berechnung der Röntgenographischen Elastizitätskonstanten (REK) des Vielkristalls
      aus den Einkirstalldaten fur beliebige Kristallsymmetrie. Z. Metallkunde 1986, 77, 620–626.
27.   Kawałko, J.; Wroński, M.; Bieda, M.; Sztwiertnia, K.; Wierzbanowski, K.; Wojtas, D.; Łagoda, M.;
      Ostachowski, P.; Pachla, W.; Kulczyk, M. Microstructure of titanium on complex deformation paths:
      Comparison of ECAP, KOBO and HE techniques. Mater. Charact. 2018, 141, 19–31. [CrossRef]
28.   Garcés, G.; Oñorbe, E.; Gan, W.; Máthis, K.; Tolnai, D.; Horváth, K.; Pérez, P.; Adeva, P. Evolution of twinning
      in extruded AZ31 alloy with bimodal grain structure. Mater. Charact. 2017, 126, 116–124. [CrossRef]
29.   Minárik, P.; Král, R.; Čížek, J.; Chmelík, F. Effect of different c/a ratio on the microstructure and mechanical
      properties in magnesium alloys processed by ECAP. Acta Mater. 2016, 107, 83–95. [CrossRef]
30.   Iwahashi, Y.; Horita, Z.; Nemoto, M.; Langdon, T.G. An investigation of microstructural evolution during
      equal-channel angular pressing. Acta Mater. 1997, 45, 4733–4741. [CrossRef]
31.   Stolyarov, V.V.; Theodore Zhu, Y.; Alexandrov, I.V.; Lowe, T.C.; Valiev, R.Z. Influence of ECAP routes on the
      microstructure and properties of pure Ti. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2001, 299, 59–67. [CrossRef]
32.   Yoo, M.H. Slip, Twinning, and Fracture in Hexagonal Close-Packed Metals. Metall. Trans. A 1981, 12, 409–418.
      [CrossRef]
33.   Minonishi, Y.; Morozumi, S.; Yoshinaga, H. {1122} <1123> slip in titanium. Scr. Metall. 1982, 16, 427–430.
      [CrossRef]
34.   Paton, N.E.; Backofen, W.A. Plastic deformation of titanium at elevated temperatures. Metall. Trans. 1970, 1,
      2839–2847. [CrossRef]
35.   Suwas, S.; Beausir, B.; Tóth, L.S.; Fundenberger, J.-J.; Gottstein, G. Texture evolution in commercially pure
      titanium after warm equal channel angular extrusion. Acta Mater. 2011, 59, 1121–1133. [CrossRef]
36.   Kim, I.; Jeong, W.-S.; Kim, J.; Park, K.-T.; Shin, D.H. Deformation structures of pure Ti produced by equal
      channel angular pressing. Scr. Mater. 2001, 45, 575–580. [CrossRef]
37.   Chen, Y.J.; Li, Y.J.; Walmsley, J.C.; Dumoulin, S.; Gireesh, S.S.; Armada, S.; Skaret, P.C.; Roven, H.J.
      Quantitative analysis of grain refinement in titanium during equal channel angular pressing. Scr. Mater.
      2011, 64, 904–907. [CrossRef]
38.   Kim, I.; Kim, J.; Shin, D.H.; Lee, C.S.; Hwang, S.K. Effects of equal channel angular pressing temperature on
      deformation structures of pure Ti. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2003, 342, 302–310. [CrossRef]
39.   Palán, J. Comprehensive evaluation of properties of ultrafine to nanocrystalline wires of Grade 2 titanium
      made by Conform SPD and rotary swaging technique, in process.
40.   Lahaie, D.; Embury, J.D.; Chadwick, M.M.; Gray, G.T. A note on the deformation of fine grained magnesium
      alloys. Scr. Metall. Mater. 1992, 27, 139–142. [CrossRef]
41.   Luan, Q.; Britton, T.B.; Jun, T.-S. Strain rate sensitivity in commercial pure titanium: The competition between
      slip and deformation twinning. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2018, 734, 385–397. [CrossRef]
42.   Prangnell, P.B.; Harris, C.; Roberts, S.M. Finite element modelling of equal channel angular extrusion.
      Scr. Mater. 1997, 37, 983–989. [CrossRef]
Metals 2018, 8, 1000                                                                                         20 of 20



43.   Duchek, M.; Kubina, T.; Hodek, J.; Dlouhy, J. Development of the production of ultrafine-grained titanium
      with the conform equipment. Mater. Tehnol. 2013, 47, 515–518.
44.   Gunderov, D.V.; Polyakov, A.V.; Semenova, I.P.; Raab, G.I.; Churakova, A.A.; Gimaltdinova, E.I.; Sabirov, I.;
      Segurado, J.; Sitdikov, V.D.; Alexandrov, I.V.; et al. Evolution of microstructure, macrotexture and mechanical
      properties of commercially pure Ti during ECAP-conform processing and drawing. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2013,
      562, 128–136. [CrossRef]

                        © 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                        article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                        (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
